Hi, I'm Robert Krulwich.
Radiolab is supported by Squarespace launching their new campaign.
Make your next move, make your next move and set new goals for this year.
Lock down your next move idea with a unique domain and create a website to
launch today by using offer code Radiolab for 10% off your first purchase of a
Squarespace domain or website.
Make your next move with Squarespace more@squarespace.com
hello, this is Sonny calling from a very rainy Houston, Texas.
Radiolab is supported by dash digital cash dash allows you to send any amount of
money using a highly secure peer to peer network.
Skip the bank entirely and control your money your way.
Dash is digital cash. For more information,
visit [inaudible] dot org forward slash radio Radiolab.
This is Radiolab. I'm Jad album rod here with Robert Crow,
which this hour we're looking at the science of emergence.
How the world often seems to organize itself into being without an obvious plan
or a leader. Well, think about an ant colony or termites, right? I mean,
they're trying to build a nest. Mathematicians, Steve Strogatz.
And if you look at any individual termite,
it's just moving along and its antennas are wiggling and it's smelling
pheromones and it has no idea what it's doing.
It doesn't know it's trying to build an s,
it's just responding to whatever little chemical is right in front of its nose.
And yet out of this, you see a coordinated group that looks like it's,
you know, everybody knows what they're doing,
but in fact nobody knows what they're doing. And the same thing with your brain.
No cell in your 100 billion cells in your brain is having a thought.
But together they are together,
they're falling in love or are wanting to write music. So who's in there?
Do we have any idea why this happens or how, I guess that's,
that's the question
[inaudible]
and it's a really fascinating question when you really kind of pause to think
about it. For example, look, I have here, you see this, there's a my,
my cup of coffee I'm looking at and you know it's a cup of coffee,
but how does my brain know that this is a cup of coffee? It's,
it's something that's uh, in a way,
it's hard to even understand what the question is because this comes so
naturally to us, right?
We just look at something and we have this integrated perception of a cup of
coffee that like, what's the big mystery? I hear you did use all of her sack.
So you had him on the show recently.
He would probably be able to talk to you in an interesting way about people for
whom this does not come easily.
There is a famous case which was reported in Germany of a, uh,
a woman who had lost motion perception and there's a very nice description,
for example, of her difficulty, Pauling t till that Oliver, now this woman,
she takes the teapot and she starts to pour and suddenly the image just freezes.
She would have stills lasting about 15 seconds.
She would see a glazier.
She used that term at glacio fluid coming from the teapot.
Her brain was seeing something, not moving,
but then her feet were getting and then suddenly there was a puddle.
They were getting wet and indeed crossing a vote.
It was impossible for this woman in Germany.
Dangerous and so it's those people who help us realize the miracle of
perception, right? That the, to see the world as a coherent thing is a miracle.
[inaudible]
should we hit them at the same time? No,
I just think of yourself as fireflies and you're own buzzing separate trees.
Okay, so back to your miracle of the Coffee Cup. So yes,
for those of us who are healthy, we do this all the time.
The question however remains how I have trillions and trillions of neurons in my
head firing randomly.
Every neuron that you're hearing here is going a little electrical thing.
And the other question is how does this,
which seems so rampantly disorganized, how does it resolve
[inaudible] Cup of coffee?
Yeah, good question.
Now, a few years ago,
a number of neurologists trying to figure out how the idea of coffee comes to be
came upon a kind of musical analogy and a bringing, creating a thought,
creating say a cup of coffee is kind of like a musical event.
Neurons in one side of the brain and another side of the brain.
I recognize them color or shape or something,
and if they vibrate together at about 40 cycles a second, if they create,
say the same note in step, that synchrony is a cup of coffee.
What's happening in the brain is that there's a part of the brain responsible
for the sense of smell, smell,
eh,
neurons that recognize the coffee aroma or firing vigorously as they smell it.
Meanwhile, they're colored detectors that happen to notice that it's a,
you know, a red mug
shape detectors as part of the visual system that are noticing the edge of the
[inaudible]
[inaudible].
At least what neurologists think is that it's the simultaneous firing of all of
those that are looking at red and at sensing the aroma.
It's the coincidence of their firing that's telling them, this is one thing.
This is not separate aromas and colors and shapes. This is,
they'd be singing together, Huh?
The one nine one one
only [inaudible]
so that is a cup of coffee.
And to think we do it every morning before we proceed.
We should thank the New York City LaGuardia Composition class are neurons where
my name's Harris middle and I'm taste my is Melanie Charles,
Danielle Devito Lloyd data.
My name is Jonathan Chu and I am smelled Jonathan Chu.
Mr Smell did the arrangements Robert Apostle conducted that we say,
wait a second here because this is interesting. Robert Apostle, yes,
their conductor told them what to do. Right.
But in your head when you think of a cup of coffee, who's conducting you
[inaudible]
and this is where we start getting into the, the very mystical or even most,
most mysterious part of this is that who is it that's paying attention? I mean,
because I mean, what is attention? How can you control you?
I don't, I don't really even know how to talk about this, but,
but there's something in you that that is uh, that is says at the signal.
Let's do coffee. Yeah. I mean cause it's confusing the,
what is it that brings one thing into attention and not the other. Anyway,
I don't know. I'm a little out of my depth here
somehow or other, whether we're looking at ants, cities with the Internet,
wherever we look,
the shape in organization of the world seems to emerge without an obvious plan.
And yet there it is.
And nowhere is this more mysterious and more difficult to really comprehend than
in our own heads. Even for scientists who work on a day after day in the lab.
Like this Guy Chris Stopcock,
I'm a professor of neuroscience and engineering at the California Institute of
Technology.
Christophe Cock is one of the most celebrated neurologists in the world.
And for him and for many others,
they have a hard time getting rid of a model deep down,
which has somewhere in there, there's a conductor.
Someone is organizing the action. You made a mema.
There's a movie by Woody Allen called everything you always wanted to know about
sex do, but the way of free to ask,
and this has great skits in it where he has um,
a couple of petting in the back of the car.
Oh my God. Sydney. Can't you wait?
Do you want to do it right here in the parking lot?
You'd see inside the boy's veins as mission control, mission control,
you have this NASA type control whom you have to speak to east clean
corresponding to the output of the eyes grade-wise come in.
I used to Brian
and you have sort of all these wide devices now for technicians running around.
All systems go and we're going to get an erection in the scene.
Which one did to do. Yeah, exactly. Then you have these, uh, you know,
all these Siemens that line up, they all have these little parachutes,
little long tails, scared. I don't want to go out there, but I mean,
the point is, so there's this control of a metaphor that, that uh,
we can all laugh about, but a lot of people,
including scientists have implicitly the idea is that me,
there's a Christoph who sits inside muted. I can tell you,
most people can tell you to, to exactly between my two eyes,
between here and here. And by the way, this Kristof, I assume would be saying,
okay, she in this, in the movies, okay, she likes me. Let's make the next move.
That's exactly what happens. Of course in the Woody Allen movie. Exactly.
So the point says, Christof Koch is that the Woody Allen model,
this idea that there's an inner command center,
some conductor directing your brain that thinks is wrong.
Now clearly there is no such person inside my head for a lot, you know,
because who sitting inside the head of this little Christoph and then who's
sitting inside the head of the person sitting inside my head.
So you see the problem,
if Christopher's thinking about a cup of coffee and he gets the idea from an
inner Kristoff who's thinking about a cup of coffee,
where did the inner Cristoph get the idea?
Maybe from an inner inner Christophe that wouldn't really solve the pong would
just push it one back. [inaudible]
[inaudible]
these are heavy problems.
What happens here is we're tiptoeing up the hill here to the Mount Sinai of of
science. Yeah. Coffee Cups and people sitting in the controls.
Well these are kind of the smaller questions on the foothills to the bigger one,
which is how does a mind reflect?
Why does someone know who an I is?
Why can you contemplate death? What is this consciousness?
That's the big question. If we can figure this out,
whatever circuit is responsible for or circuits responsible for human
consciousness. Think of what we can do.
One day a doctor could walk into a patient's hospital room with patient is
laying comatose and uh,
put a helmet on them with a conscious oh meter,
let's call it and measure how alive they are.
Very maybe even tickle a part of their brain and wake them back up.
[inaudible] [inaudible] idea, by the way,
came from one of the most famous scientists of the 20th century who worked very,
very closely with Christopher Koch. Um,
I'm talking about a man named Francis Crick. I,
even if you know nothing about science at all,
you've probably heard about the discovery of the structure of DNA,
the DNA molecule by Watson and crick. This is that crick. Hmm.
He was a British guy.
He moved to southern California and at some point he and Christopher Koch met.
Now, coke was much, much younger, decades younger than the older guy,
and yet they formed one of the more magical partnerships,
a kind of Gilbert and Sullivan or who Rogers and Hammerstein of neuroscience.
And one of the ideas that crick had was that there is a way,
there must be a way to figure out what consciousness is all about.
They developed this notion,
there's no conscious entity inside my head that serves the whole of conductor.
That's not to say that that may not be places in the brain that act akin to a
conductor,
that sort of synchronized and that coronate the various parts of the brain that
find a penalty.
Because one of the remarkable phenomena of continence is everything's
integrated. When I look at you and you talk, your voice comes out of your mouth.
When you move, the motion I perceive is attached to your head. No in the brain,
all the things that analyze in different parts of the brain.
So you need some sort of entity that pulls all these different networks of the
brain together. Is there a place in the brain that does that well?
So Francis Crick and I think so in fact it was a, the,
the subject of his last paper that he worked on,
on literally on the day he died.
This is a odd structure in the brain called the cloud storm clouds to means
hidden away. And it's a small area.
It's sort of an elongated sheet like structure beneath the cerebral cortex.
You have two of them, one on the left and one of the right.
And what's remarkable about it? Indeed,
distraction receives input from almost every cortical area,
the teams to be in an ideal position.
If you want to go to the metaphor of synchronizing all the different activities
and making sure they all in some sort of lockstep.
So Francis and you have this idea and he is very sick with cancer and he wants
to get this idea down is what's God's calling. Can you describe the scene there?
You first had this idea 10 years ago and he talked about it innocent in his book
that he published in 94 and then we never thought much more about it over the
last year. We came back to this, um, this,
this sort of somewhat obscure structure. So he was very,
very interested in it and yeah, he felt his, he felt his, um,
you know, as he felt his illness coming on and getting stronger,
he was very adamant about trying to finish up a manuscript.
So he literally worked days and days and days.
There's this beautiful photograph of his desk covered probably four inches deep,
just with paper pertaining to the cloud storm. And he worked a particular,
the last six weeks, um, the United Tighter Finish, a manuscript to,
to get in reasonable shape for us to, to publish.
And so he was on the day he died.
He was still writing the scientists to the bitter end.
Here's a kind of Mozart's requiem quality to this. Yes, yes.
Yup.
What was the last thing that you and he said to each other?
Hello?
I'll see you on Thursday or Friday.
I was supposed to visit him in the hospital to work on this manuscript.
And was the manuscript completed? Uh, no, it's,
I'm currently working on it.
I'm editing it and then sending out and abouts send it out to friends.
[inaudible]
cause I feel a little bit exactly like, um, the student of Mozart,
his name's escapes me, who finished his [inaudible].
He had a student in finished spectrum and now musicologist today at deciding
what is actually original Mozart and what was finished in the style of Mozart.
And so I say much aware of this and you're stuffing in Italics or something or
something. Like on the other end we published 22 or 23 manuscript together.
And the way we always worked that he wrote the first draft was very insistent
upon that. And then I vote, you know,
I edit it and then he edit my edits and so we iterate it. Unfortunately,
I can't do this here anymore. So you know,
I just have to edit his draft without the benefit of his feedback.
[inaudible]
Christoph cough is a professor of neuroscience and engineering at the California
Institute of Technology. His newest book is the quest for consciousness.
There's more of Radiolab online@radiolab.org communicate with us.
Why are their radio lab at w n y C. Dot.
Org is the address I'm Jad Abumrad [inaudible] and I are signing off enough.